Take 4: Leadership chapter with 3 new subchapters and landing page (#3136)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/collaboration/leadership/leadership-building.md

Open and emergent leaders understand that research and communities are political, with members from various identities, backgrounds and political interests, who are affected by the social discourse.
Therefore, they learn to hold safe spaces to have discussions and respond to the need for culture change with the members affected or oppressed by the status quo.
Leaders should build crucial [ally skills](https://www.software.ac.uk/blog/2021-07-05-why-we-discuss-ally-skills-open-science) to use their privileges to step up for others in the teams.
- **Ensuring Diversity**: Diverse teams are high-performing teams.
Data science and research projects are no exceptions where diverse teams should be supported.
Diverse teams are indispensable and inherently essential for ensuring benefits for people impacted by the processes and outcomes.
Empathic and effective leaders understand the importance of diversity, build diverse teams and centre on the interests of marginalized interests.
Good leaders respect and celebrate cultural differences and welcome everyone by providing inclusive approaches and policies. 

> Being welcoming and inclusive is challenging because it varies a lot by culture and personality. 

Author: This is a strange phrase - let me rework this.

> Being welcoming and inclusive is challenging because it varies a lot by culture and personality. 

Author: ```suggestion
This means understanding that people come from different cultural background and lived experiences and have different preferences or style of working (reference: [The Culture Map](https://erinmeyer.com/books/the-culture-map/)).
Leaders should be intentional in designing projects and teams' ways of working to embed practices that welcomes and include all stakeholders.
If there are certain limitations for including specific groups of people such as external stakeholders, this should be clearly recorded and communicated.
```

At the core of this is building diverse teams, bringing perspectives from diverse cultural backgrounds and working with them to solve problems faster.
- **Consensus**: Leaders act on as much consensus as possible, even when they do not agree with the decision individually.
A healthy way to navigate the difference is to create spaces to have informed conversations where multiple perspectives are explored and the team can assess the pro and cons of each possible decision. 
This also means that leaders provide a process for how decisions are made, and invite inputs from their team members on improving it further.
Sometimes it may mean that they reach out to the people who don't actively engage, or feel left out of the consensus to make decisions that are best for the maximum number of people affected by it.
- **Trust**: Healthy leadership trust in the skills and ability of people around them and identify the best fit for everyone to succeed.
They are aware of their own biases and avoid them intentionally, often by providing space to listen to different thoughts and perspectives. 

> They guide people to adapt to changes and transformations particularly when leading large projects, with many moving parts and teams.

Author: I wanted to emphasise of surprises that can make people feel unsupported
```suggestion
They support people to [navigate and manage changes](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/do-you-navigate-manage-change-barbara-kramer-zarins-mba/) by helping them understand where they stand in relation to coming changes particularly when leading large projects, with many moving parts and teams.
```

- **Delegation**: Leaders are to lead by example, but they will be unable to do everything and should not do everything either. 
When a leader is in charge of too many aspects of a project they will become a bottleneck and blocker to the emergence of other open leaders.
Delegation goes hand in hand with building a trustworthy environment, this means that they communicate clearly the overarching goals, create smaller milestones and delegate tasks meaningfully so different people can lead different parts of the work, nurturing healthy leadership habits within their teams.
- **Power dynamics**: Power dynamics are relationships between people in an organisation with varying levels of privileges. 

> Power dynamics are often created by leaders.

Author: That's a good point.
I guess what I wanted to say is that Leader are the source of power dynamics because of traditional heirarchy they exist in. We can simply use what you said there.

> Power dynamics are often created by leaders.

Author: ```suggestion
Leaders hold power because of their position in the project (formally or socially) and hence have significant influence over how those power dynamics are experienced or manipulated in their teams and communities.
```

Leaders with formal authority come with institutional power and open leaders often come with informal connections that can translate into social capital or power (even when they don’t have formal authority in the organisation).
Therefore, leaders should understand how their positions affect the dynamics when working with others in their team, even when not exerting their power.
Understanding power dynamics helps leaders identify and resolve conflict, build consensus, and create a more effective team culture.

> - **Acknowledging fairly**: Leadership roles come with a lot of visibility for their roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Acknowledging fairly**: Leadership roles come with a lot of visibility.
```

This is partly earned by leaders' work as individuals but is often enhanced by the work of others in their teams. 

> Open leaders recognise and celebrate all kinds of work, appreciate and celebrate them openly and give appropriate credit to everyone, including those whose work makes them visible often taking invisible responsibilities for the sake of the overall success.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open leaders recognise and celebrate all kinds of work, appreciate and celebrate them openly and give appropriate credit to everyone, including those who take on invisible responsibilities for the sake of the projects' overall success.
```

> ##  What should Leaders Avoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##  What Should Leaders Avoid
```

- **Elitism and hypocrisy**: Open leadership in research in general benefits a lot from equity, inclusivity and diversity (EDI). 
Thus, traits that sabotage EDI goals, should be avoided at all costs.
Attitudes like elitism and hypocrisy can have unintended consequences on the project as well as on the leaders themselves.

> Elitism is when leaders constantly reinforce their authority, status, and expertise, creating distance between them and junior/new members of their teams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elitism is when leaders constantly reinforce their authority, status, and expertise, creating distance between themselves, experienced team members, and junior or newer members.
```

> Hypocrisy is holding others accountable for one set of quality measures, and having a lesser standard for themselves.

Reviewer: This is a very specific definition for quite a general phrase in English - we might want to consider if we need to be more specific in our phrasing (for example a lot of English speakers won't interpret hypocrisy as different standards automatically)

Author: How would you define it?

Author: ```suggestion
Hypocrisy is when leaders hold their team members to a different standard than that to which they hold themselves.
```

Leaders should hold the same standards for everyone and create spaces for collaboration through egalitarian rather than authoritative means.

> - **Ignoring the personal side of the team**: members of the team/organisation can disclose or not as much as they want from their personal lives. 

Reviewer: I think we should start by acknowledging that people have multiple sides of their lives and only part of it might be visible when they contribute to a project or team, then go into the rest of this

Author: ```suggestion
- **Ignoring the personal side of the team**: People have multiple sides of their lives and only part of it might be visible when they contribute to a project or team.
Leaders should set an environment where their team members feel safe to disclose as much or as little they want from their personal lives. 
```

> But it is up to the leader to ensure that their team members feel safe to express the issues that affect their work such as their physical or mental health, and understand each others' challenges such as those caused by invisible or visible disability or caring responsibilities outside work and can seek help from each other or professionals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But it is up to the leader to ensure that their team members feel safe to express the issues that affect their work such as their physical or mental health, and understand each others' challenges, such as those caused by invisible or visible disability or caring responsibilities outside work.
They should also ensure people know where and how to ask for help, whether that help comes from colleagues or professionals. 
```

> If leaders don't make it ok for their team members to share their sides, team members most likely (and even newer members of the team), would not know what is appropriate and won't ask for help even when they need it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If leaders don't make it ok for their team members to share their challenges, team members, particularly newer members, will not know what is appropriate and won't ask for help even when they need it. 
```

> This will likely have an impact on the overall project/team/organisation dynamics, opportunities for building trustworthy teams and often their mental health (which may result in burnout).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will likely have a negative impact on the overall project/team/organisation dynamics, decrease opportunities for building trust, and affect people's mental health, which may result in burnout.
```

> - **Tunnel vision**: Leaders should be aware of the research landscape, trends and state-of-the-art technology/approaches relevant to their teams. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tunnel vision**: Leaders should be aware of the research landscape, trends, and state-of-the-art technology/approaches relevant to their teams. 
```

> Even if the organisation or a project might focus on one line of work, awareness about and an understanding of what is 'going on around' at the broader level will prompt further discussions and go beyond finding quick solutions.

Reviewer: I don't understand the second part of what this sentence is trying to say - are we saying that a broader awareness might help with novel and innovative connections and support creative problem solving? Or something else?

Author: ```suggestion
Even if the organisation or a project might focus on one line of work, awareness about and an understanding of what is 'going on around' at the broader level help create a better direction for the project.
They should prompt their team members to engage in discussions that help them go beyond finding quick solutions.
```

> - **Hide weaknesses**: Weaknesses should be something we should embrace and work on, not something to hide - especially for leaders. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Hide weaknesses**: Weaknesses should be something we should embrace and work on, not something to hide - especially leaders. 
```

> Leaders should not put unrealistic expectations on their team members to know everything they should encourage diverse complementing skills and create teams where everyone can learn from and build on each others' skills.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leaders should not put unrealistic expectations on their team members to know everything, unicorns do not exist!
Instead, they should encourage complementing skillsets and create teams where everyone can learn from and build on each others' skills.
```

Sometimes people's strengths can be their 'weaknesses' in other situations, and vice versa.

> - **Trying to be a leader everywhere**: The same person should not be a leader everywhere. People in one or several lead positions would ideally leave room for others to take on leadership positions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Trying to be a leader everywhere**: The same person should not be a leader everywhere.
 People in one or several lead positions would ideally leave room for others to take on leadership positions. 
```

> Good leadership takes a lot of time. It is often not possible to lead well if leading several projects. Leadership and limited time allocation are often incompatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Good leadership takes a lot of time. 
It is often not possible to lead well if you are leading several projects. 
Leadership and limited time allocation are often incompatible.
```

## Address Conflict of Interest with Feedback Process

A conflict of interest is a situation in which the leader (or one of their team members) has a private or personal interest, directly or indirectly, that (potentially) influences or appears to influence the objective of their duties as a leader, to the detriment or benefit of the team.

If a person participates in several projects or spaces (professional or personal), they will likely have overlapping interests.
Based on the nature of their roles in those projects, the nature of their relationship with different project teams (sometimes with overlapping groups of people) will differ.

> It is the core responsibility of individuals to identify and declare their Conflict of Interest proactively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is the core responsibility of individuals to identify and declare their conflicts of interest proactively.
```

They should make it clear in what capacity or in what role (from the multiple 'hats' they wear) they are operating.
They should separate the conversations to avoid confusion for people they work with and if needed, they should step away from a situation, transferring the leadership responsibilities to others.
In [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HQjRnWVmL28), Carol Willing explains how it is critical to abstain from decisions as a leader when you have a conflict of interest.

## Learn from mistakes 

> With great power comes great responsibility

> We are all humans and make mistakes. Healthy leadership recognises, accepts and apologizes when they make mistakes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are all humans and make mistakes. 
Healthy leadership recognises, accepts and apologizes when they make mistakes.
```

A good leader owns their mistakes, takes responsibility for the harm caused by their error, rights the wrong, and learns from mistakes going forward. 

> A substantial component of visible vulnerability will only make leaders better. Genuine vulnerability builds trust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A substantial component of visible vulnerability will only make leaders better. 
Genuine vulnerability builds trust.
```

It is often not possible to lead well if you are leading several projects. 
Leadership and limited time allocation are often incompatible.

## Address Conflict of Interest with Feedback Process

A conflict of interest is a situation in which the leader (or one of their team members) has a private or personal interest, directly or indirectly, that influences, or appears to influence, the delivery of their duties as a leader, to the detriment or benefit of the team.

If a person participates in several projects or spaces (professional or personal), they will likely have overlapping interests.
Based on the nature of their roles in those projects, the nature of their relationship with different project teams (sometimes with overlapping groups of people) will differ.
It is the core responsibility of individuals to identify and declare their conflicts of interest proactively.
They should make it clear in what capacity or in what role (from the multiple 'hats' they wear) they are operating.
They should separate the conversations to avoid confusion for people they work with and if needed, they should step away from a situation, transferring the leadership responsibilities to others.

> In [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HQjRnWVmL28), Carol Willing explains how it is critical to abstain from decisions as a leader when you have a conflict of interest.

Author: ```suggestion
It is also important to remember that you may have different levels of power depending on which “hat” you’re wearing - for example, as a friend, you might be entitled to ask someone things about on a personal level that would be inappropriate to ask if you are acting as their manager.
In [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HQjRnWVmL28), Carol Willing explains how it is critical to abstain from decisions as a leader when you have a conflict of interest.
```

Author: @yochannah Your input is going here.
